```
 __                   __          
│  │ ______________  │  │ ______  
│  │╱ ╱╲_  __ ╲__  ╲ │  │╱ ╱  _ ╲ 
│    <  │  │ ╲╱╱ __ ╲│    <  <_> )
│__│_ ╲ │__│  (____  ╱__│_ ╲____╱ 
     ╲╱            ╲╱     ╲╱      
```

# Krako

the Quantum Experimental Laboratories at 0xpblab — directory

A web1-style directory of interesting places on the internet.

This is a Gemini capsule.

---

## Welcome

Welcome to a mildly organized pile of internet oddities, lovingly indexed by 0xpblab.

Here you'll find a collection of things that made someone go "hmm", things that made someone go "why", and things that made someone go "what".

The internet is weird, and that's okay.

---

## Explore

### Pages

=> /pages/recomendati0n.gmi Recomendati0N

### Collections

=> /collections/cartas/random/index.gmi Letters for Pablo
=> /collections/mentalhealth/main/index.gmi Mental Health

---

## Quick Start

=> /pages/recomendati0n.gmi Browse curated links
=> /collections/cartas/random/index.gmi Explore personal letters collection
=> /collections/mentalhealth/main/index.gmi Explore mental health collection

---

## About

This capsule is a curated collection of interesting places on the internet and personal correspondence from the early web era.

Navigate using the links above, or explore the collections to discover content that captures the spirit of the independent web.

Enjoy your journey through the weird and wonderful corners of the internet.

---

*Crafted with questionable taste and questionable methods*
---

desenvolvido por pablo murad - 2024 - 2026
