# Solveultima


=> /collections/New/adventure/solvefor.gmi ← Solvefor
=> /collections/New/adventure/index.gmi ↑ Section index
=> /collections/New/adventure/sorcerer.gmi Sorcerer →
Read this next:
=> /collections/New/adventure/sorcerer.gmi Sorcerer

---

3

HOW TO SOLVE ULTIMA ][:
-----------------------

WRITTEN BY:
-----------

COPY              **/=================/
    /       OF    /HI-RES<>HIJACKERS/
     CAT          /=================/**
   %> Distributed by Pirate Island <%
           %> 612/825-5852 <%

ABOUT YOUR CHARACTER:
---------------------

MAKE SURE YOUR CHARACTER HAS A STRENGTH
OF 30 OR MORE.  THIS IS A BUG IN THE
PROGRAM THAT WON'T ALLOW YOU TO SOLVE
THE ADVENTURE W/O THAT STRENGTH.

STEP-BY-STEP:
-------------

1] BUILD UP YOUR CHARACTER BY HANGING
AROUND A TOWN OR CASTLE OR BOTH AND
KILLING MONSTERS.  ONCE IN A WHILE SEE
IF YOU HAVE OBTAINED A BLUE TASSLE. IF
YOU HAVE ONE THEN THE NEXT FRIGATE YOU
SEE GO ON TOP OF IT AND USE IT.  CLONE
IT BY MOVING AROUND UNTIL ANOTHER SHIP
APPEARS BEHIND YOURS.  GO ON THAT ONE
AND DO IT AGAIN UNTIL YOU HAVE A FEW.
WITH A FRIGATE FLEET YOU CAN EASILY
BUILD UP YOUR CHARACTER UNTIL HE/SHE
HAS ENOUGH GOLD TO BUY A TON OF HIT
POINTS AND EQUIPMENT.  WHEN YOU HAVE
QUITE A BIT OF HIT POINTS AND AT LEAST
500 GOLD GO OVER TO NEW SAN ANTONIO.
WASTE SOME GUARDS AND GO OVER TO THE
JAIL, OPEN IT UP, AND OPEN THE MIDDLE
ONE IN THE LEFT ROW.  GIVE HIM ABOUT
5OO GOLD AND HE'LL GIVE YOU THE BEST
WEAPON POSSIBLE, A QUICKSWORD.  YOU
HAVE TO HAVE A LOT OF AGILITY TO USE
IT THOUGH.  TO BOOST ABILITY SCORES,
GET MORE GOLD AND GO BACK TO NEW SAN
ANTONIO TO THE HOTEL AND FIND THE CLERK
IN THE CORNER.  START THROWING HIM ONE
OR TWO HUNDRED GOLD AT A TIME AND HE'LL
BOOST YOUR SCORES SORT OF RANDOMLY.
THEN HIT "V" FOR VIEW AND FIND THE AREA
UP TOP WHERE THE PLANE AND THE OLD MAN
IS.  GO UP TO THE OLD MAN AND TRANSACT
WITH HIM.  LEAVE HIM AND GO TO THE
PLANE AND HIJACK (HAH) IT.  FLY OUT OF
THE CITY.  GO INTO TIME DOORS UNTIL
YOU GET TO THE 21ST CENTURY ERA (IN THE
PLANE OF COURSE).  FLY OVER TO PIRATE'S
HARBOR (NOT TROVE) AND GRAB A ROCKET.
BLAST OFF AND LAND (YOU BETTER HAVE AT
LEAST REFLECT ARMOR).  NOW GET READY TO
GO TO PLANET X BY FIGHTING ENOUGH
MONSTERS SO YOU HAVE AT LEAST 3 TRI-
LITHIUM CRYSTALS.  BLAST OFF AND GO TO
PLANET X BY HYPERSPACING TO 9-9-9 (THE
COORDINATES WERE FOUND IN BARADIN'S
TOWN WAY BACK IN THE OLDEST ERA).  LAND
THERE AND FIND THE CASTLE (DON'T GO IN
THE TOWN OR YOU'LL REGRET IT).  EXPLORE
THE AREA AND FIND FATHER ANTOS.  THEN
TRANSACT WITH HIM AND GO BACK TO EARTH.
SCROUNGE UP 500 MORE GOLD AND GO TO NEW
SAN ANTONIO AGAIN.  GO TO THE OLD MAN
AND GIVE HIM THE CASH.  GET SOME MORE
CASH AND BUY HIT POINTS UNTIL YOU HAVE
AT LEAST 9000.  GO OVER TO THE PLACE
WITH ALL THE TIME DOORS AND FIGHT YOUR
WAY OUT (OR FLY OVER THEM).  GO TO THE
MOATED CASTLE AND ENTER IT (WITH THE
RING YOU HAVE IT MADE).  IT'S BETTER
TO GO IN THE SIDE DOOR.  HIT V TO VIEW
THE ENTIRE PLACE AND HEAD TO THE UPPER
RIGHT.  EITHER KILL THE BALRONS OR USE
A COIN TO PARALYZE THEM.  GO UP TO
MINAX AND ATTACK HER UNTIL YOU HIT.
HEAD DOWN TO THE LOWER LEFT ROOM AND
HIT HER AGAIN, BLASTING OR PARALYZING
ANY MONSTERS THAT GET IN YOUR WAY.  GO
BACK AND FORTH ABOUT 10 TIMES UNTIL
MINAX IS DEAD.

--------------------------------------






TUTORIALS AND WALK THRUS

[1]: ULTIMA /// TUTORIAL
[2]: ULTIMA /// WALK THRU
[3]: ULTIMA II WALK THRU
[4]: MASQUERADE WALK THRU
[5]: COVETED MIRROR WALK THRU

(1-5, Q=Quit) Article #Q
<>
The Pier Active
Command: A

Articles of Interest:


ARTICLES MENU

[1]: CRACKING CORNER
[2]: TUTORIALS AND WALK THRUS
[3]: GAME CHEATS
[4]: SYSOP'S COLUMN
[5]:  FREE SPACE 
[6]:  FREE SPACE 

(1-6, Q=Quit) Article # 1

CRACKING CORNER

[1]: BASICS OF BASIC CRACKING 1
[2]: BASICS OF BASIC CRACKING 2
[3]: APPLE //E CRACKING

(1-3, Q=Quit) Article #2

   %> Distributed by Pirate Island <%
          %> 612/825-5852 <%

      PART IV - ONE LOAD CRACKS

NOW WE ARE READY TO MOVE ON TO ONE LOAD CRACKING.  A ONE LOAD PROGRAM IS ONE THAT COMPLETELY LOADS ITSELF INTO MEMORY AND NEVER ACCESSES THE DISK AGAIN FOR MORE INFORMATION.  SOME PROTECTIONS LOAD THE ENTIRE PROGRAM INTO MEMORY, BUT NIBBLE COUNT OR RE-LOAD PARTS OF THE GAME TO MAKE THE PROTECTION HARDER.  THIS TYPE OF PROTECTION IS THE KIND ON WHICH A CRACKING CARD WORKS WELL.  BUT, NOT EVERYONE HAS A CRACKING CARD AND NOT ALL CRACKING CARDS WORK ON SINGLE LOAD PROTECTIONS.  THAT IS WHY IT IS WISE TO LEARN HOW TO CRACK IT WITHOUT ADDITIONAL HARDWARE, EXCEPT A 16K RAMCARD WHICH MAY BE NECESSARY TO USE TO EXIT FROM MOST PROGRAMS.  THERE ARE GENERALLY TWO WAYS TO

CRACKING CORNER

[1]: BASICS OF BASIC CRACKING 1
[2]: BASICS OF BASIC CRACKING 2
[3]: APPLE //E CRACKING

(1-3, Q=Quit) Article #3

                       %> CRACKING ON THE //E <%
                    %> Distributed by Pirate Island <%
                          %> 612/825-5852 <%
                       %> From the WAREHOUSE <%

FINALLY - A NEW CRACKING TECHNIQUE! THIS ONE REQUIRES AN APPLE //E WITH THE
EXTENDED 80 COLUMN CARD.
IT SEEMS APPLE OVERLOOKED SOMETHING WHEN THEY DESIGNED THE EXTENDED MEMORY -
ANYTHING LOADED INTO THE AUXILLARY RAM IS UNAFFECTED BY RESET (EVEN OPEN-APPLE
RESET)! THE TRICK IS TO MAKE A PROGRAM BOOT INTO THAT RAM AND HERE'S HOW TO
DO IT:

FIRST, GET INTO THE MONITOR, TYPE THE FOLLOWING, AND INSERT YOUR PROTECTED DISK

   ]CALL -151

   *0:8D 03 C0 8D 05 C0 4C 00 C6 (THIS SETS UP A ROUTINE TO ENABLE THE AUX RAM
                                  AND BOOT A DISK).
   *0G                           (THE DISK WILL BE LOADED INTO AUX RAM)

ONE CATCH - WHEN THE AUX MEMORY IS ENABLED NONE OF THE NORMAL KEYBOARD AND
SCREEN I/O WILL WORK AND THE APPLE WILL APPEAR DEAD. AS SOON AS THE DISK SHUTS
OFF, THE PROGRAM WILL BE LOADED INTO THE AUX RAM. THE APPLE WILL BE DEAD, SO
SIMPLY REBOOT WITH ANY NORMAL DOS. NOW, THE NEXT STEP IS TO RECOVER THE
CONTENTS OF THE AUX RAM. THE 80 COLUMN FIRMWARE HAS A VERY HANDY ROUTINE TO DO
THIS AND IT CAN BE ACCESSED EASILY FROM THE MONITOR AS FOLLOWS:

    ]CALL -151

    *300:18 4C 11 C3
    *3F8:4C 00 03      (THIS CAUSES THE ^Y COMMAND TO MOVE AUX MEMORY TO
                        MAIN MEMORY).

YOU CAN USE THE <CONTROL-Y> COMMAND AS FOLLOWS TO ACCESS ANY MEMORY RANGE:

    *800<200.7FF^Y     (THIS MOVES THE LOW MEMORY RANGE TO MAIN MEMORY STARTING
                        AT $800, WHICH CAN BE BSAVED UNDER DOS)

   *800<800.95FF^Y     (NOW MOVE IN THE MIDDLE RANGE AND BSAVE IT AS ONE OR
                        MORE DOS FILES STARTING AT A$800)

   *800<9600.BFFF^Y    (MOVE THE DOS INCLUDING RWTS TO MAIN MEMORY STARTING
                        AT $800)

YOU CAN NOW SAVE THESE PIECES OF CODE AS DOS FILES AND HAVE FUN WITH THEM.


CRACKING CORNER

[1]: BASICS OF BASIC CRACKING 1
[2]: BASICS OF BASIC CRACKING 2
[3]: APPLE //E CRACKING

(1-3, Q=Quit) Article #Q
<>
The Pier Active
Command:
---

By Pablo Murad — 2024–2026
